Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MTAB-800
Investigation Title	Open TG-GATEs (in vivo repeat dosing)																																					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Open TG-GATEs (in vivo repeat dosing)
Experiment Description	The Toxicogenomics Project was a 5-year collaborative project (2002-2007) by a consortium comprising the Japanese government and several pharmaceutical companies. The project produced the 'Toxicogenomics Project-Genomics Assisted Toxicity Evaluation system' (TG-GATEs), a large-scale database of transcriptomics and pathology data potentially useful for predicting the toxicity of new chemical entities. Conventional in vivo toxicology data was collected from single dose and repeat dosing studies on rats, and gene expression measured for the liver (and kidney in some cases). To provide information on species differences, gene expression was also measured in rat and human hepatocytes treated with the chemicals in vitro. Approximately 130 chemicals, primarily medicinal compounds, were tested at multipe doses. Gene expression was analysed using Affymetrix GeneChip arrays. The gene expression data has been submitted in four parts: in vivo single dose (E-MTAB-799), in vivo repeat dosing, in vitro rat (E-MTAB-797) and in vitro human (E-MTAB-798). This submission comprises the in vivo, repeat dosing studies. If publishing results based on this data, please cite the full project name 'Toxicogenomics Project and Toxicogenomics Informatics Project', the database name 'Open TG-GATEs' and the URL 'http://toxico.nibio.go.jp'. Please note that the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) was not involved in the Toxicogenomics Project in any way, acting only to submit the transcriptomics data to Array Express. Queries about the project can be addressed to the consortium directly via 'opentggates@nibio.go.jp'.																																					
Experimental Design	compound_treatment_design	in_vivo_design	co-expression_design	dose_response_design																																		
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array																																					
Comment[Associated Investigation]	E-MTAB-797; E-MTAB-799; E-MTAB-798																																					
Comment[Project Website]	http://toxico.nibio.go.jp/																																					
Comment[AdditionalFile:CSV]	open_tggates_attribute.csv																																					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of rat liver and kidney after exposure to approximately 130 chemicals collected from repeat dosing studies.																																					
Experimental Factor Name	Compound	DoseLevel	TimeOfSacrifice	OrganismPart																																		
Experimental Factor Type	compound	dose	time	organism_part																																		
Quality Control Type	biological_replicate																																					
Public Release Date	2012-02-10																																					
Person Last Name	Toxicogenomics Project and Toxicogenomics Informatics Project	Akhtar	Atkinson																																			
Person First Name		Ruth	Francis																																			
Person Email	opentggates@nibio.go.jp	rutha@ebi.ac.uk	francis@ebi.ac.uk																																			
Person Affiliation	National Institute for Biomedical Innovation, Japan	EMBL-EBI	EMBL-EBI																																			
Person Roles	investigator	submitter	submitter																																			
PubMed ID	20041446	16360708	18480146	17202761	19761811																																	
Publication Author List	Uehara T, Ono A, Maruyama T, Kato I, Yamada H, Ohno Y, Urushidani T.	Takashima K, Mizukawa Y, Morishita K, Okuyama M, Kasahara T, Toritsuka N, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Uehara T, Kiyosawa N, Shimizu T, Omura K, Hirode M, Imazawa T, Mizukawa Y, Ono A, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Tamura K, Ono A, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Kondo C, Minowa Y, Uehara T, Okuno Y, Nakatsu N, Ono A, Maruyama T, Kato I, Yamate J, Yamada H, Ohno Y, Urushidani T.																																	
Publication Title	The Japanese toxicogenomics project: application of toxicogenomics.	Effect of the difference in vehicles on gene expression in the rat liver--analysis of the control data in the Toxicogenomics Project Database.	Species-specific differences in coumarin-induced hepatotoxicity as an example toxicogenomics-based approach to assessing risk of toxicity to humans.	Profiling of gene expression in rat liver and rat primary cultured hepatocytes treated with peroxisome proliferators.	Identification of genomic biomarkers for concurrent diagnosis of drug-induced renal tubular injury using a large-scale toxicogenomics database.																																	
Publication Status	published	published	published	published	published																																	
Protocol Name	P-MTAB-23026	P-MTAB-23027	P-MTAB-23028	P-MTAB-23029	P-MTAB-23030	P-MTAB-23031
Protocol Type	grow	compound_based_treatment	sacrifice	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization																																
Protocol Description	Male Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from Charles River Japan Inc. at 5 weeks of age. Animals were given a 7 day quarantine and acclimatization period. The rats were divided into groups of 5 using a computerized stratified random grouping method based on the body weight for each age. The animals were individually housed in stainless-steel cages in a room with 12 hours lighting (7:00-19:00) daily, ventilated with an air-change 15 times per hour, maintained at 21-25C, relative humidity 40-70%. Each animal was allowed free access to water and pellet food (CRF-1, sterilized by radiation, Oriental Yeast Co., Japan).	Each compound was administered at four different dose levels; control (vehicle only), low, middle and high. The highest dose for each compound was determined in a one-week dose-finding study, and 1/3 and 1/10 of that were set as the middle and low doses. For administration via oral gavage, compounds were dissolved in 0.5% methylcellulose solution or suspended in corn oil depending on their dispersibility. Compounds requiring intravenous administration were dissolved in saline or 5% glucose solution. The animals in each group were dosed daily for 3, 7, 14 or 28 days and sacrificed 24 hours after the last dose. Body weights were recorded every day, while food consumption was recorded every four days.	Animals were euthanized by exsanguination from the abdominal artery under ether anesthesia. Immediately after sacrifice, a 30 mg aliquot of the left lateral lobe of the liver and of the kidney was put into RNAlater (Ambion) for expression profiling. Other data obtained from each animal include body weight, liver and kidney weights, clinical chemistry, hematology, general symptoms and a histopathological examination of the liver and kidney.	Total RNA was isolated using an RNeasy Kit by BioRobot 3000 (Qiagen) 	Microarray analysis was carried out on 3 out of 5 samples. The procedure was carried out according to manufacturers instrucions using SuperScript Choice System (Invitrogen) and  T7-(dT)24 oligonucleotide primer (Affymetrix) for cDNA synthesis, cDNA Cleanup Module (Affymetrix) for purification and BioArray High Yield RNA Transcript Labeling Kit (Enzo Diagnostics) for synthesis of biotin-labelled cRNA.	10 ug of fragmented cRNA was hybridized to the probearray for 18 h at 45C at 60 rpm, after which the arraywas washed and stained by streptavidin-phycoerythrin usingFluidics Station 400 (Affymetrix) and scanned by Gene ArrayScanner (Affymetrix).																																
Protocol Parameters		Compound; DoseLevel; Dose; DeliveryMethod; TimeOfSacrifice																																				
Term Source Name	ChEMBL
Term Source File	https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembldb/																																					
SDRF File	E-MTAB-800.sdrf.txt
