Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MTAB-797
Investigation Title	Open TG-GATEs (in vitro rat)																														
Comment[Submitted Name]	Open TG-GATEs (in vitro rat)
Experiment Description	The Toxicogenomics Project was a 5-year collaborative project (2002-2007) by a consortium comprising the Japanese government and several pharmaceutical companies. The project produced the Toxicogenomics Project-Genomics Assisted Toxicity Evaluation system (TG-GATEs), a large-scale database of transcriptomics and pathology data potentially useful for predicting the toxicity of new chemical entities. Conventional in vivo toxicology data was collected from single dose and repeat dosing studies on rats, and gene expression measured for the liver (and kidney in some cases). To provide information on species differences, gene expression was also measured in rat and human hepatocytes treated with the chemicals in vitro. Approximately 130 chemicals, primarily medicinal compounds, were tested at multipe doses. Gene expression was analysed using Affymetrix GeneChip arrays. The gene expression data has been submitted in four parts: in vivo single dose (E-MTAB-799), in vivo repeat dosing (E-MTAB-800), in vitro rat and in vitro human (E-MTAB-798). This submission comprises the in vitro rat studies. If publishing results based on this data, please cite the full project name Toxicogenomics Project and Toxicogenomics Informatics Project, the database name Open TG-GATEs and the URL http://toxico.nibio.go.jp. Please note that the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) was not involved in the Toxicogenomics Project in any way, acting only to submit the transcriptomics data to Array Express. Queries about the project can be addressed to the consortium directly via 'opentggates@nibio.go.jp'.																														
Experimental Design	compound_treatment_design	in_vitro_design	co-expression_design	dose_response_design																											
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of rat hepatocytes treated with approximately 130 chemicals in vitro.																														
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array																														
Comment[Associated Investigation]	E-MTAB-798;E-MTAB-799; E-MTAB-800																														
Comment[Project Website]	http://toxico.nibio.go.jp/																														
Comment[AdditionalFile:CSV]	open_tggates_attribute.csv																														
Experimental Factor Name	Compound	DoseLevel	TimeOfCollection																												
Experimental Factor Type	compound	dose	time																												
Quality Control Type	biological_replicate																														
Public Release Date	2012-02-10																														
Person Last Name	Toxicogenomics Project and Toxicogenomics Informatics Project	Akhtar	Atkinson																												
Person First Name		Ruth	Francis																												
Person Email	opentggates@nibio.go.jp	rutha@ebi.ac.uk	francis@ebi.ac.uk																												
Person Affiliation	National Institute for Biomedical Innovation, Japan	EMBL-EBI	EMBL-EBI																												
Person Roles	investigator	submitter	submitter																												
PubMed ID	20041446	16360708	18480146	17202761	19761811																										
Publication Author List	Uehara T, Ono A, Maruyama T, Kato I, Yamada H, Ohno Y, Urushidani T.	Takashima K, Mizukawa Y, Morishita K, Okuyama M, Kasahara T, Toritsuka N, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Uehara T, Kiyosawa N, Shimizu T, Omura K, Hirode M, Imazawa T, Mizukawa Y, Ono A, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Tamura K, Ono A, Miyagishima T, Nagao T, Urushidani T.	Kondo C, Minowa Y, Uehara T, Okuno Y, Nakatsu N, Ono A, Maruyama T, Kato I, Yamate J, Yamada H, Ohno Y, Urushidani T.																										
Publication Title	The Japanese toxicogenomics project: application of toxicogenomics.	Effect of the difference in vehicles on gene expression in the rat liver--analysis of the control data in the Toxicogenomics Project Database.	Species-specific differences in coumarin-induced hepatotoxicity as an example toxicogenomics-based approach to assessing risk of toxicity to humans.	Profiling of gene expression in rat liver and rat primary cultured hepatocytes treated with peroxisome proliferators.	Identification of genomic biomarkers for concurrent diagnosis of drug-induced renal tubular injury using a large-scale toxicogenomics database.																										
Publication Status	published	published	published	published	published																										
Protocol Name	P-MTAB-23065	P-MTAB-23066	P-MTAB-23067	P-MTAB-23068	P-MTAB-23069	P-MTAB-23070
Protocol Type	grow	compound_based_treatment	collection	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization																									
Protocol Description	Hepatocytes were isolated by a modified two-step collagenase digestion from the livers of 6 week old male Sprague-Dawley rats. Hepatocytes were not used when their viablity assessed by trypan blue exclusion was lower than 70%. Cells were seeded into 6-well plates (BD Biocoat Collagen I Cellware, BD Bioscience) at a density of 1x10^6 cell/well in 2ml HMC Bulletkit medium (CAMBREX) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Following an attachment period of 3 hr, the medium was replaced and kept overnight before drug exposure at 37C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2.	Each compound was administered at four different dose levels; control (vehicle only), low, middle and high. In general, the highest concentration was 10-20% of the lethal concentration as estimated by LDH leakage over 24 hours. When the cells could tolerate 10 mM or the level equal to the solubility limit the highest concentration was set to that value. The middle and lowest concentrations were set to 1/5 and 1/25 respectively of the highest. Test compounds were added to the medium directly or as a 1,000X stock solution in DMSO. Cells were exposed to compound for 2, 8 and 24 hr before collection.	After compound exposure, the hepatocytes were lysed with RLT buffer and collected for expression profiling. Cell viability was assesssed by LDH release and DNA content. 	Total RNA was isolated from the hepatocyte lysate using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen).	Labeling was carried out according to manufacturers instrucions using SuperScript Choice System (Invitrogen) and  T7-(dT)24 oligonucleotide primer (Affymetrix) for cDNA synthesis cDNA Cleanup Module (Affymetrix) for purification and BioArray High Yield RNA Transcript Labeling Kit (Enzo Diagnostics) for synthesis of biotin-labelled cRNA.	10 ug of fragmented cRNA was hybridized to the probe array for 18 h at 45C at 60 rpm, after which the array was washed and stained by streptavidin-phycoerythrin using Fluidics Station 400 (Affymetrix) and scanned by Gene Array Scanner (Affymetrix).																									
Protocol Parameters		Compound; DoseLevel; Dose; TimeOfCollection																													
Term Source Name	ChEMBL
Term Source File	https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembldb/																														
SDRF File	E-MTAB-797.sdrf.txt
